of the bill that are being presented to broaden the funding
from energy related to charitable purposes.
And today, the trust can only fund energy related purposes or
projects. This bill would enable the trust to support any charitable purpose that
benefits the district community, in addition to continuing to support energy
related purposes. And I think
it's worth noting that they would then have to
determine what their eligibility criteria looks like, and what their vision
for the region was, and how their grant funding would
help to support that.
And the second purpose, the bill will alter the trust deed so it can be updated in
the future with safeguards, which allows for future flexibility.
Instead of needing another act of Parliament for future trust deed updates, the
bill allows future amendments with strong safeguards, and trustees would be able to
amend terms only where it would be in the trust's best interest to
further the charitable purpose.
I think it's worth understanding a little bit about the Eastern Bay of Plenty
community.
Population size, 37,000.
Māori, the share of the Māori population there, 56%, large
Māori community. High area of
deprivation. Average household income, well below the New Zealand
average. The benefits received, very high in terms of comparison
with the New Zealand average. Home ownership, low.
Rent affordability pressure, very high.
NCEA level two at age 18, well below average.
And the NEATS rate, very high. School leavers with no qualification, well
above the national average. The community is in
need of support in ways that it can
deliver better projects and better community deliverables
in so many different areas in the voluntary and community organization space.
In the Eastern Bay of Plenty, there's only a certain number of energy related
purposes available to support within the district, which has led to 30 years of
static grant distribution despite population growth.
By the end of this year, the trust will have distributed about $55
million in energy related purposes, and the trust estimates this
change could mean an additional 1 million to 2 million more per year available for
the community in the Eastern Bay of Plenty, which supports community and sporting
organizations, and the many volunteers who keep the public sector and the
not-for-profit organizations going.
At the same time, as I said, the community wellbeing
goes well beyond energy, and the limitation on making grants only for energy
related purposes restricts the trust's ability to respond to changing community
needs or to support charities, societies, and other worthy groups that
do not meet this definition. With the present limitation on energy related
purposes, the trust has been able to grant about $900 per person in its
district over the past 30 years. And by contrast, the neighboring
Rototuna Trust, which has broader charitable purposes, has been
able to grant about $2,000 per person in its district over the same
period. In considering the need for change, the trustees have traversed many
conversations, and I think it worth covering off some of those for the benefit
today. As was statutorily required, the trust consulted widely,
including conducting a poll, of which 3,625 people
responded to, and 80.7% of those supported the changes.
Those who supported the bill supported a wider range of social, educational,
cultural, and environmental initiatives to include a wider variety of community
projects and groups. This expansion is seen as a way to strengthen
healthy, vibrant, and innovative communities, by providing grants that address
diverse needs. For example, youth initiatives, education, wellbeing,
community partnerships, and support for Māori and rural communities were frequently
highlighted as important areas for funding.
Of those who opposed the changes, many felt it might result in higher power prices
for consumers, but this often comes from confusion about the difference between the
trust and the electricity distribution company, Horizon Energy.
Related to this, the trustees considered a variation of the energy related purposes
under Part 3 of the Charitable Trusts Act, so they looked to see if that was
an easier way to make this change. However, the ability to
vary charitable purposes under the Charitable Trusts Act
is limited, and the trustees do not want a narrow change to the energy
related purposes. They desire broader charitable purposes, which they can then
define through their funding criteria and eligibility, to allow them to do
more and fund more in the community.
The trustees explored a consumer distribution model, but Trust Horizon is quite
different to most other energy trusts in that it is a charitable trust,
so in distributing funds, it has to meet both the trustee purpose and be
charitable in law. Providing a small, regular payment to all electricity
users, as some consumer trusts do around the country,
is not a charitable activity and so would not qualify.
The trust instead granted up to $2,000 to support charitable causes with
energy bills and co-funded the EECA Warmer Kiwi Homes initiatives to make
insulation and heating free for anyone that was eligible.
This equated to, on average, $1,000 for insulation and
$700 for heating. The trust has been
integral in insulating more than 50% of all homes in the district through its
insulation contribution, creating energy savings and healthy homes for past,
current, and future generations.
And it has a community energy contribution grant each year for up to
$2,500 per eligible organization, to
assist with the impact of power prices.
It provides low interest lending for organizations wanting to install solar and has
deployed over $1 million in funding to date for this purpose.
This includes lots of different equipment, such as electric lawnmowers,
rollers, electric mobility vans, school EV
chargers, community bike chargers, and others.
It supports local groups with the energy transition funding projects at around 1 to
$2 million in granting a year. And still, the funds accumulate due to the narrow
nature of the trust. So the trustees have agreed that a wider charitable
purpose would be the most efficient way for the trust to assist with that need, and
a private bill is the only way to achieve that goal.
The trust has
already committed letters of support to us, which I have seen,
for the bill from the Energy Distribution Limited, Horizon
Energy Distribution Limited, the settler of the trust, the Bay Trust, Bay of Plenty
Regional Council, Kawerau District Council, Opotiki District Council, Whakatane
District Council, Te Runanga o Ngati Awa, Ngati Manua, Ngati
Fare, TECT, the Rotorua Trust, and Philanthropy New
Zealand.Trust Horizon frames its purpose as creating
transformational change and bringing pride and prosperity to the region with a
focus on long-term tangible benefits.
The trust's intention is to unlock transformational change by enabling more
funding that positively impacts communities and supports a wider
range of people in the community, projects, and
groups across Whakatane, Kawerau, Opotiki, and Kaingaroa Village.
In their words, the long-term vision is a thriving Eastern Bay, where our funding
can respond to what communities need most over time, and where the trust can invest
for durable outcomes rather than being locked into a narrow 1990s
definition of energy-related purposes.
So, I could go on for a long time.
But we are at time, and-
And I think that's enough from me
Thank you very much for that very comprehensive submission.
I appreciate it.
It's my pleasure, and I am very proud to be
presenting the trust and the bill and the community in this process.
Thank you.
Thank you for the work that you do. Okay.
Right. Our next speaker, or next submitter, is Trust Horizon,
and I believe Derek Caldwell, the chief executive, is presenting
online.
Or in person?
In person.
Online. I'm one of the lawyers assisting
Oh, okay. That's all right. Good morning, Derek,
and welcome.
We have
15 minutes with you this morning.
So if you wanted to introduce yourselves, and then we just
go through, and if you want to leave any time for questions, please feel free to do
so. But the time is yours.
Good morning. Thank you very much. Tena koutou katoa.
Thank you all for taking the time to hear submissions
today on Trust Horizon's variation bill, and in particular to our local
MP and Deputy Chair of the committee, Dana
Kirkpatrick, who's been integral to getting us to this point in the process.
Ko Derek Caldwell ahau. My name is Derek Caldwell, and I'm the CEO of Trust
Horizon. I'm joined today by the trust chair, David Glover.
And in the room with you is Jonathan Orpin-Dowd from
Stout Street
Chambers, who's been our legal counsel, along with
Sharp Tudhope. It's our pleasure to be able to present our submission to you today
on behalf of Trust Horizon, a registered charitable trust
serving the Eastern Bay of Plenty for over 30 years.
To make the best use of the time,
I'll highlight a few key areas from our submission and leave plenty of time for
questions.
At its core, this bill is about enabling Trust Horizon to continue
fulfilling its charitable mission of providing transformational
investing into our community well into the future
by unlocking funding beyond energy-related purposes to ensure
our governing deed reflects and is responsive to current and future
community needs.
Trust Horizon was established in '94 as part of the electricity
sector reforms under the Energy Companies Act.
Our primary purpose is to grant funds back into the local communities,
with over 50 million granted over our 30 plus years of operation.
One of our proudest achievements has been early and sustained investment
into home insulation, alongside the government, helping
to insulate tens of thousands of homes, reduce energy poverty, and improve
public health outcomes.
The trust now holds assets of over 200 million, making it a
significant and enduring philanthropic
institution in one of New Zealand's most socioeconomically
deprived areas.
The trust has a vision of enabling pride, prosperity, and people through our
funding.
In order to be able to make grants to the community, we hold a range of
investments,
our largest investment being in the Horizon Energy Group, which is an
independently governed and run company that evolved from the original
setter of the trust.
Despite our scale and capacity, Trust Horizon faces a fundamental constraint.
Our trust deed limits us to funding energy-related purposes only.
Trust Horizon is now the only energy trust in New Zealand that remains
exclusively restricted in this way.
That's right.
While energy remains critical, especially for households facing hardship,
there is now a natural ceiling on how many genuinely charitable
energy-specific projects
exist within our district.
As a result, annual grant levels have remained largely static until very
recently, and the trust capital has continued to grow.
Our ability to respond to broader community need has been artificially
restricted. The issue we face is not a lack of demand, but
eligible scope for organizations to apply for funding.
The Eastern Bay of Plenty is highly deprived, and the community need is obvious.
Trustees are doing what they can, with the vast majority of applications we receive
being funded.
Yet when we look across to our peers and neighboring communities, we know that we
can be doing much more. The Eastern Bay of Plenty includes some of the most
deprived communities in the country, and we all know that
community wellbeing extends well beyond energy purposes alone
into areas such as housing, health, education, the
environment, and social cohesion.
By comparison, neighboring charitable trusts with broader purposes have been able
to deliver significantly greater per person funding over the same
period.
The trustees believe, strongly and unanimously, that the trust has the
capacity, and indeed the obligation, to do more.
The bill proposes making two targeted and principled changes.
Firstly, it broadens the trust purposes from being
limited to energy-related purposes to supporting any charitable
purpose recognized in New Zealand law,
which allows us to continue to fund energy-related initiatives as well as
other activities.
This does not alter our charitable status or allow private
benefit
or change how or in what we invest funds to generate returns for
our granting.
And importantly, it does not diminish our energy-related
heritage.It simply allows trustees to respond
appropriately to real and evolving needs of our communities.
Secondly, the bill introduces a sensible mechanism for future trust deed
updates.
Rather than requiring another private act of Parliament, any future changes would
be assessed by trustees as being in the trust's best interests,
further its charitable purposes, and require High Court approval.
This provides flexibility while maintaining strong and independent safeguards.
Why do we need to come to Parliament to do this?
Over the trust's history, it has explored every available alternative and
found no other way to achieve this change.
The courts cannot make the change under existing trust law, and the Charitable
Trust Act expressly prevents the type of purpose expansion
proposed here.
Only Parliament has the authority to modernize the trust's purposes
in this way.
Importantly, had the trust been set up slightly differently in '94, these
broader purposes could have existed from the outset, as they
do for many comparable trusts.
This bill seeks to correct this historic anomaly.
The trustees have not taken preparing a bill to Parliament lightly
and have sought community-wide mandate to do so.
Our region-wide community poll showed over 80% support for both
proposed changes, and we have received strong written support from local
councils, iwi and hapū, fellow charitable trusts, community
organizations, and our settler.
This is a well-tested, community-endorsed proposal.
In closing, this bill is not about expanding power.
It is about unlocking public benefit for community good.
It will allow the trust to reset and scale its community funding in proportion
with the equity it holds on behalf of the community.
It modernizes a 30-year-old trust deed while preserving charitable
integrity and strong oversight. Most importantly, it
allows Trust Horizon to better serve the people of the Eastern Bay of Plenty,
today and for generations to come.
We really appreciate the committee's consideration of this matter, and we
respectfully ask the committee to recommend the bill to proceed.
Thank you, and we welcome any questions you may have.
Thank you very much. We do have a few questions. I'll start with Lawrence.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for joining us, and thank you to your
local MP for bringing this bill.
I just have, I guess, one or maybe a supplementary question.
So I'm noticing, I'm noting that it says the trust now has more than $200
million in assets.
What proportion of that, either by proportional amount currently, is
going towards the existing purpose, which is energy-related objectives?
And that's been the first part of the question, and the second part is,
by unlocking it to charitable purpose, what projections do you have in
terms of the proportion of that $200 million will be going towards
charitable purposes, or if you have amount figure for that as well?
Yeah. So, in our trust submission, it's about on
page five and six. We've presented some graphs
showing the percentages
of our equity. So at the moment, it sits at around anywhere
between 1% and 1.5%
of our equity goes towards energy-related purposes.
So that, in broad terms, that's about $3.5 million
per annum.
Other charitable trusts, they can achieve 3% to
4.5%. We think certainly by unlocking
the
charitable purposes in the short to medium term, it'll unlock
a further $1 to $2 million per annum into the community.
Thank you.
Longer term, hopefully, we can achieve similar
levels that other charitable trusts do.
Next question, Helen.
Hi. First of all, I was born in Kawerau, so I have a stake in this
game. I know how important
money is there,
in terms of unlocking the potential and the levels of deprivation.
What I want to know is, first of all, it sounds like you've
tried to saturate the need for energy efficiency,
and I'd love to know what you've seen as a result in
terms of particularly health, and then I'd like to know
what kinds of projects are
likely. We haven't had a specific
example, so what kinds of projects do you hope to
fund in a community like Kawerau?
Yeah. So,
in terms of the projects we'd like to fund,
the energy-related restriction really limits our ability to fund
operational granting. So,
salaries and other
operational expenses that really make a huge difference to
charities and nonprofits because that allows them to sustain a
kaupapa for a longer period of time and have much more impact in the
community.
So that's really an area that we'd like to unlock with this
change.
Sorry, the first part of the question was about the impact of our
insulation activities over the years and the health benefits.
Of what you've done in the energy space.
It sounds like you've done what you can in the energy space, and it's
not something that we've seen across the country.
And I know that insulation, for example, makes a huge difference
to things like rheumatic fever,
and health outcomes,
in general, if you have warm, dry homes.
I'd just love to know what you've seen in that community as a result of your
work.
Yeah. So there have been some studies,
one sort of in the early 2000s,
around the health impacts, but there haven't,
as far as I'm aware, haven't sort of been any
follow-up-Studies specifically
on the Eastern Bay of Plenty community.
Unfortunately,
rheumatic fever, respiratory illness is still a real problem in
our communities,
despite all the investment that has gone into insulating homes.
Insulation is, as you'll be aware, sort of only one part of the equation.
You also need to heat the homes. And so,
Warmer Kiwi Homes, moving into the home heating
space in the last couple of years, hopefully over time we'll see that
change have a real impact in terms of health outcomes for our
community.
Thank you.
And we've been sitting alongside Warmer Kiwi Homes to make that
free for those who are eligible in our community.
Next question, Jamie.
Thank you for the submission. I'm quite interested in your definition
of charitable purposes, and I'm wondering where
that definition has come from, and
the part mostly is where you got elsewhere in New
Zealand. And I understand that obviously you've got then the
directly or indirectly benefiting the community.
So could you give me some
where the definitions come from and how that's been landed on?
And then I guess from this committee's point of view, how much we focus on that
definition.
Jonathan, are you able to comment on that?
Sure.
So the general definition of charitable purposes just picks up the definition that
exists under existing charitable law.
So it allows the trustees to take projects that will be charitable and decide
what the highest and best use is. In terms of the language about
directly or indirectly in other parts of New Zealand, the thinking
is that it's a small community, so there might be, for example, a project that's
taking place, like a hospital, that's going to be built outside the district
but which will serve people in the district.
And that by making a contribution, then they can provide better access for people
in the district through maybe busing, getting them into the services.
But you'll never provide all the social services that you'd want
for a community of people in a district of that size.
So by allowing the trustees to contribute to things outside the district, as long
as they're satisfied it's going to benefit the community, then you've unlocked
the potential to do that. It would obviously be a matter of trustee discretion,
wouldn't expect them to fund services that have got no connection to the district.
But if you've got something, say, that's in the
largest metropolitan area outside the district, so Tauranga, and
that's going to serve X percentage of the community, and you want them to have
those services, realistically, the only way is to allow that
outside as long as there's a connection back in.
So that's why the language about the connection is there, and then it will be a
matter for the trustees to satisfy themselves in the ordinary way that making that
particular grant would actually serve their community, even though geographically,
the funds might be going outside the district. Does that make sense?
It does, yeah. Can I just... A second question was the
trustees,
obviously it's been energy-related purposes.
So will there be a hierarchy
between the energy-related purpose or
projects will have higher priority over the charitable
purposes? How will you then decide which projects
take priority
considering where you've been in the past?
So,
we
are in the process on the basis that hopefully this
bill will proceed, of exploring how we're going to have to recalibrate
our grant decision-making, because we will have a wider world to
consider. But one thing all the trustees are very unanimous
about is we are not walking away from our energy-related purpose history.
All those things, the insulation still needs to continue.
All the things that we're currently doing are doing good things, we believe.
So it's part of our history, but it's also part of our future
priority.
Last question, Maureen.
Thanks very much. I'm not sure who to direct this at, but I'd just like to
refer to the High Court's
comment in your submission around
the declining of the trust's application in 2006, which
says that under the trustee, the central terms of the trust were
intended to remain constant during its natural life.
Yet this proposed bill is a massive
departure from that, and it's a very broad departure.
So did you consider a more narrow
rationale or a more narrowing of the purpose rather
than such a broad constitution?
Do you want me to take that, Derek?
Yeah, if you could, Jonathan.
Yeah, so, this well predates my involvement in the matter,
but I understand that it's been an issue for the trustees for some time about how
they can modernize and update the trust deed, including its purposes.
As members will probably be aware, there's nothing that prevents you, when you
settle a trust, having a power to change the terms of the trust, and lots
of other community trusts that were set up at the time did that, and so they don't
have to come before you and take up your valuable time.
So the trustees in 2006 tried to
effectively achieve a similar aim by resettling assets
onto a new trust, which would have broader purposes
than the current trust. And what the High Court said is, and this just
relates to general trust principles-
Mm.
... that the resettlement wouldn't be valid because the purpose of the resettlement
was effectively to change the terms of the trust deed, which there wasn't a
power in the trust deed to do. There could've been, but they hadn't put one in.
So what the High Court is saying is you can't do this under your existing trust
deed and in light of general trust law principles.
But of course, the reason that we have Parliament in relation
to the charitable space is that when that's not possible, Parliament can
approve broader changes, which is why we've come to you.
In terms of the second part of the question, as I understand it, and
Derek and the trustees can comment,
we accept it would be possible to achieve a narrower variation through
the Charitable Trusts Act 1957. But those variations
have to hew as closely as possible to the original
purpose of the deed, which means that you could expand the district maybe,
or maybe have adjacent purposes to energy-related purposes, but
you couldn't open up the universe of charitable purposes.
And so the thinking is what is best from a public policy point of view, and
I guess that's really what the trustees are asking the committee to decide and
endorse, is to use the funds where they can be best used,
where they've got the highest and best use, and the only way to do that is to allow
the universe of charitable purposes.
And then trustees can consider the applications that come before them, and if
they're in some way related to tackling rheumatic fever
or
energy-related purposes that are not currently covered but are wider than that,
then they can say, "Well, what's the business case for these things?" And choose
the best one. If they go down the Charitable Trusts
1957 process, they'll just have to hew as closely as
possible to what's there, even though there might be much better
projects out there in terms of where you'd get best value for investment.
Does that make sense?
It does make sense, but it doesn't satisfy my inquiry-
Sure
... because the
The charitable purpose is related to energy projects.
Yes.
And
I still can't see how
those energy-related projects are not saturated yet.
I know we heard from
Dana Kirkpatrick that they have exhausted them.
But when you look at improvements to the supply of electricity,
inadequate or unreliable supply issues,
I can't see that those opportunities haven't yet been
exhausted. Or even if there is a, I'll call it a
problem or a challenge with too much cash,
maybe the
distribution that they're getting could be reallocated into reducing the
lines charges for everybody, which would serve
everybody. But what we're expecting the trust to
do is then pick winners in their community.
And you ask anybody if they want more cash, of course, they're going to say yes.
So I'm not surprised that the community is behind this.
But in terms of why the trust was set up in the first place
and the charitable purpose that was established for
energy-related purposes, I'm not sure yet that
the trust has saturated all their ability to exhaust that cash-
Sure
... in those projects, even the research
and development opportunities that could exist.
So there's probably a legal answer and a factual answer to that, and perhaps I can
help with the legal answer and then leave the trustees to talk about the factual
answer. But part of the legal answer is that although they are
energy-related purposes, and you mentioned, for example, reducing distribution
costs for consumers, they still have to be charitable.
And so, granting that would just go directly to
individual consumers as some of the other energy-related
trusts that were set up wouldn't be charitable because it's providing
individual pecuniary benefits to people.
And the law of charity says that that's not generally
charitable. And so even within that scope of energy-related
purposes, being charitable imposes limitations on
what you can do. And then I think the sort of factual answer, which Derek can pick
up on, is
I don't think anyone's saying that there won't be more energy-related granting to
do going forward, but just that if you look at the number of applications that are
coming in, they're approving, I think 80, 90% of them each year.
But that's still leading to equity building up because
there's not enough applications coming in that they can grant that come
within the terms of it. So the idea is that if you make this
change, they can continue doing that granting work that they're doing around their
1%. But in terms of moving up to comparable levels where they wouldn't be running
down the capital and would still be continuing to grow but putting more money into
the community, they can do that through other projects because they're just not
getting the applications at the moment that fit within the terms.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you. We are well over time, but I see there are more questions, but we can
put through ones afterwards. But look, I-- well, thank-
And if you've got more questions, we're happy to answer them in writing.
Yeah.
Give some more detail.
Yeah, can do that.
Be very happy to do that.
Thank you very much. No, thank you all for presenting to the committee this
morning. Appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Our next submitter is Bay Trusts, Bay of Plenty Community Trust, and we have
Alison Rhodes, the Chief Executive.
I believe it's online.
Good morning, Alison. Welcome to the committee.
So we have 10 minutes with you this morning if you want to introduce yourselves,
and then...
Sorry, we have 15 minutes with you this morning. No, 10, sorry.
Just double-check my
calculation. No, it is 10 minutes.
And so the time is yours, and if you want to leave time for questions, please feel
free to do so.
Kia ora. Just checking you can hear us fine.
Yeah, we can. No, thank you.
Awesome. Kia ora koutou. Ko RT, Chief Executive of Bay Trust.
Ko Alistair Rhodes toku ingoa. Nau reira, tena koutou katoa.
Look, I'm really privileged to be a CEO of Bay Trust and presenting on behalf
of Bay Trust our submission to the select committee today, where we'll be strongly
endorsing the Trust Horizon Variation Bill.
Also want to introduce some colleagues. To my left is Sam Cummins.
So Sam Cummins is Bay Trust's Community Investment and Policy
Manager.
And I think I'd argue, say Bay-- Sam has got probably one of the most
richest experience of the not-for-profit and charitable sector down in the Eastern
Bay of Plenty because we offer a broad range of funding down into that kind of
sector.
Look, I know how busy the select committee is, and I assume you've actually
received and, I'll take this, read our written submission.
So I don't want to go through that written submission in detail.
I just want to highlight a few key points and make sure we leave plenty of time at
the end of this session for question and answers, which is probably going to be the
most valuable as well. In terms of context,
Bay Trust is a community trust, so we've been around for 35-odd years.
We were set up to own the shares of Trust Bank, and in 1996, we
sold those shares, $89 million, to Westpac and created a
diversified investment fund, which is worth today around $290 million.
Annually, we grant around 8 to 9 million out to the Bay of Plenty kind of
communities, and about 2 million of that is granted into the Eastern Bay of Plenty
communities each year as well.
The other thing that's unique about Bay Trust, we're one of 12 community trusts
that operate under the Community Trust legislation.
And under that legislation, we have a very broad mandate or purpose, which
I think is really important to note.
So under the act, it says that we're there to grant anything in terms of
charitable, cultural, philanthropic, recreational, or any other
purpose. So really broad purpose in terms of actually what we do and
what we grant out to in the community.
And that's important because over the last 35 years, our community needs have
changed significantly. What we used to grant 35 years ago is not
such an important need as what we grant now.
An example of that is social media over the last few years in terms of some of the
harm caused, which we now grant into that area, which simply did not exist
35 years ago. And that's why having a very broad purpose actually makes a lot of
sense for a philanthropic foundation like
ourselves.As far as we can recall, this is the first time in
Bay Trust's 35 years that we've ever presented to a select committee, and
this does illustrate the importance we hold in terms of this kind of
process and in terms of our support for this Trust Horizon
Variation bill.
We are one of the few significant philanthropic funders down in the Eastern Bay of
Plenty,
and we have direct oversight in terms of the unmet need in that charitable and the
not-for-profit sector down there.
Pretty much for every $2 to $3 requested of funding, we might
be able to provide grant funding of around $1, so there's a significant
unmet need. And when we look at those applications going through,
most of them are very, very impactful.
We'd like to fund a lot more down into that region, but we simply do not have
sufficient funding to do that.
In particular, areas we noticed that would need sufficient more funding down into
the Eastern Bay of Plenty, youth development, whanau support, aged
care, food security, budgeting services, and environmental
services are all crying out for further funding down into that region.
We also, every year over the last 10 years, we've surveyed our Eastern Bay of
Plenty not-for-profit sector and our communities down there to
understand what their actual needs are.
And it's very clear when we get those survey responses back that they are
desperately crying out for more funding in terms of early operational cost
funding, that backbone funding in terms of those
aforementioned kind of services.
The Eastern Bay of Plenty region is one of our most deprived regions across New
Zealand. You think of districts like Ōpōtiki and Kawerau, they
always rank pretty much at the top of our deprivation indexes.
So when we talk about the Eastern Bay of Plenty, we're talking about some of our
most disadvantaged communities in the
country. At present, as you've previously
discussed, Trust Horizon is constrained to energy-related
purposes.
That worked reasonably well at the start, but as our community's needs do change,
for a philanthropic organization to have the most impact, being able to have some
flexibility in terms of that purpose and to respond to changing needs
over time, we think is incredibly important.
So we do consider amending the trust deed and extending its charitable
purpose as both appropriate and necessary, and provides the flexibility
to meet those community needs as they change and adapt over time.
We've seen the impact of this firsthand in our other regions.
For example, in the Western Bay of Plenty, TECT, one of our other big funders down
here,
clarified and changed and expanded their purposes a few years ago, and we've
seen the positive impact that's made to our communities.
We also recognize Trust Horizon has a strong record
of governance and a long-standing commitment to community benefit, and
we are confident with an expanded mandate, Trust Horizon would continue to
operate with integrity and increase its positive impact and make much more of a
meaningful impact in the Eastern Bay of Plenty communities.
So accordingly, Bay Trust, on behalf of our board, we strongly support the
Trust Horizon Variation bill, and we really encourage the select committee
to support and progress the proposed changes.
And so both Sam and I, as I said, I've tried to keep this short, are available to
ask any kind of questions the select committee has of us.
Oh, beautiful.
Great. Thank you. Lawrence.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you for your submission.
Looking at your submission, and just in terms of what the Horizon Trust mentioned
as well, I have one question, I guess for trust in general.
What's the application process like to apply
for funding, and is that application process accessible?
Do you do any education campaigns as well on how to
apply?
Yeah. Kia ora, Lawrence. We have
regular community engagement, so we're in the community often where we
run hui workshops on how to apply.
We're always more than willing to help applicants, and our application
process is online. So go on our website and follow that through, and
it takes around 90 minutes for the average
application, so that's fairly short.
The intention is to be as accessible as possible for the community.
And can I check, and this is also something that just occurred to me now.
In one of the previous submissions, it talks about the high
percentage of Maori populations in East Coast.
Are applications allowed to be bilingual?
Yes. Yeah.
Okay.
And we have a specific Maori iwi relationship
manager who can facilitate that if it needs to be. Yeah.
That's really cool. Thank you.
Thank you.
Maureen.
Yes. I just have a question around the capital.
So the accumulation of capital,
rather than a shift in energy needs or
research and development or whatever, can you explain
why you think that would be justification for a departure
from the charitable purpose, the existing charitable purpose?
Is that a question for us, Maureen, or is that a question for Trust Horizon?
Oh, well, Trust Horizon have gone, but-
... in terms of-
Sorry.
Look, I understand your point of view of
distributing funds-
Yeah
... for charitable purposes around the
district.
Yeah.
But what I'm struggling with is-
Oh, okay. I think I see
... the departure from the charitable purpose that exists.
Yeah.
So do you have a view about-
Yeah
... justifying the accumulation of capital as a reason to open
the door to other opportunities?
Yeah, I do think we've got a view on that.
Under the trust law, you've got to be fair to
your beneficiaries, equitable to your beneficiaries.
So it means distribution around your region, across your outcome areas, but if
you're a perpetual long-term trust like us, you have to have also that
intergenerational fairness as well.
So we're not there, and this will be the same for Trust Horizon, not there to just
grow a bigger and bigger investment base every year.
We try and grow and align our investment returns to at least
cover the inflation and a bit of population growth each year, and any surplus we
distribute back into the community.
So if Trust Horizon doesn't have sufficient energy-related purposes
granting, they're just building up a bigger and bigger investment kind of
base, which we do not believe is actually fair to the current generation of
beneficiaries, and that's why we support expanding their mandate.
They can actually put more grants out of the door and still grow their
investment base in line with inflation and maybe a bit of population growth, but
actually be fair to the current generation of beneficiaries as well.
Okay, good answer.
Thank you very much. Look, thank you for appearing before the committee this
morning. Appreciate your submission.
Thank you.
Good.
Right, our next submitter is Sport Bay of Plenty.
Chair, this is done.
Just wait until we've got... Oh, there we go. Good morning.
So welcome to the committee this morning.
Morena.
Yeah, morena. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
You probably sort of heard the drill before. So the time is yours.
If you want to leave any time for questions, feel free to do so.
Thank you very much, and tena koutou katoa. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair and the committee, for the opportunity to speak today.
Called Denene Jones, toku ingoa.
I am based here in Whakatane, and I'm speaking on behalf of Sport Bay of
Plenty, which is a regional sports trust in the region.
We work across Whakatane, Kawerau, Ōpōtiki, and other
surrounding rural communities. And a large part of our purpose is, I suppose, to
support physical activity and play active recreation and
sport. So we work closely with community clubs and organizations to
support their capability and those opportunities back into the community.
As per our written submission, Sport Bay of Plenty does strongly support the Trust
Horizon Variation Bill because we see it as a practical and much
needed opportunity to unlock better outcomes for the Eastern Bay community here,
outcomes that are currently being held back, not by lack of community effort
or ideas, but by limited and constrained funding.
So I do want to take the opportunity in the next few minutes, I suppose, to paint a
bit of a picture of the need and the opportunity within this region.
As you've already heard, the Eastern Bay of Plenty faces compounding challenges
that make locally responsive funding especially critical.
Our communities experience high levels of socioeconomic
deprivation, rural isolation and transport barriers,
aging and deteriorating community infrastructure, and importantly,
a limited funding pool when compared to other Bay of Plenty regions.
This is despite being home to communities facing higher barriers and
greater needs than some of our surrounding regions.
These challenges directly limit access to play, recreation, and sport,
and when that access limit is limited, unfortunately, the impacts do ripple
outwards, affecting physical and mental health, social connection
and resilience, and outcomes for our tamariki and
rangatahi in the region.
And community sport and recreations have told us directly
of the challenges that they are facing within this region, not only to grow,
but simply to remain sustainable.
Eastern Bay of Plenty sports and recreation clubs support tens of thousands of
participants across our region with a strong focus on young people.
In fact, here in the Whakatane district, we have a high population compared
to other regions of rangatahi and young people.
Yet at the same time, when we survey clubs, 50% of those clubs
report urgent maintenance needs,
and many lack long-term planning capacity and face fragile funding
sustainability. The average Eastern Bay rating during that
survey for funding sustainability is lower than the regional average across the
wider Bay of Plenty. So when compared to our clubs in Tauranga or
Rotorua,
our Eastern Bay clubs rate their funding sustain-- sustainability, sorry,
lower. Critically, the club volunteer base is already stretched in
this region with limited capacity and capability, which further compounds
their ability to access funding and act on their community
aspirations.
These clubs, I want to stress, are committed and they are collaborative,
but they are operating at the edge of viability,
and the result is clear. Limited funding is also limiting access and
participation in play, active recreation, and sport.
The needs are very strong, and we see that as a regional sports trust, but
unfortunately, the constraints mean that projects stall, our facilities
are deteriorating, and volunteers are burning out.
When funding is constrained, the opportunity is constrained within this region,
even when the willingness, the ideas, and the community commitment are all
present. National evidence from Sport New Zealand,
they did a social return on investment study a little while back, shows that
investment in play, active recreation, and sport, for every dollar invested,
there's more than a double return in social outcomes.
Those returns are particularly powerful in communities such as ours,
facing disadvantage and isolation where barriers to access are
already high. Playing sport and recreation, unfortunately, are
sometimes described as a nice to have.
In the Eastern Bay of Plenty, however, they're an essential part of wellbeing
for our communities.
When funding can reach into these spaces, this community, more flexibly,
the payoff is not just participation, it translates into stronger, healthier,
more connected communities.
From our perspective, this bill is not about expanding discretion or changing the
trust's values. It is about modernization, not mission
drift. And
the trust has spoken that they will maintain their energy related granting.
An expansion of funding opportunities in the Eastern Bay can help address a lot of
the unmet need that we see within our region.
That includes sport and recreation facilities that are safe, accessible, and fit
for purpose. Initiatives that reduce cost and transportation
barriers for participation, particularly important when we have communities that
are quite spread out across the region.
Inclusive community and Maori-led initiatives, and support for
volunteer and leadership capability within the sector.
These are not peripheral issues. They are foundational to wellbeing,
connection, and resilience within the Eastern Bay.
Adjunct to supporting the change in the charitable purpose, we also support the
bill's safeguard requiring High Court approval for future trustee
changes. I think we've seen over time the challenges that the trust has faced
in attempting to have a broader remit around that
charitable purpose.So that proposed change would ensure
flexibility is matched with accountability and ongoing alignment with
charitable purpose.
So just to conclude, Sport Bay of Plenty sees this bill as a meaningful and
impactful opportunity.
It responds to clear evidence of need within our community.
It enables investment in charitable purposes with strong public benefit.
And it unlocks the ability to direct resources towards locally led
preventative solutions that communities are already calling for.
We therefore respectfully encourage the committee to support the passage of the
Trusts Horizon Variation Bill and to recognize the significant role
it can play in enabling stronger, healthier, and a more connected
Eastern Bay of Plenty community, supported by places and spaces and
programs and opportunities that keep our people active and
engaged.
Thank you very much.
I think you've answered everyone's questions very comprehensive, Denaye, so
thank you for that.
That's good.
It was a very good submission.
Look, no, thank you, and appreciate you appearing before the committee this
morning.
Thank you. Thank you, Denaye.
Our next submitter is the Cancer Society Waikato Bay of
Plenty via Zoom.
Right. I think I have my sound sorted, but not
my camera.
Yes. No, thank you, Helen. We can hear you loud and clear.
We can't see you, but we know you're there.
So look, thank you for appearing as the chief executive of Cancer Society Waikato
Bay of Plenty. We have 10 minutes with you this morning.
Right.
The time is yours. If you want to save time for questions at the end, if people
have them, feel free to do so.
Just having a little bit of a technical
challenge.
No worries.
Have I
got it?
Oh, there we go. We can see you.
Who said people in Gen Y couldn't solve technical problems?
Well done.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you for having me this morning.
I call Helen Carter, ""
or Arahi, and Society Waikato Bay of Plenty.
Ultimately, I'm here today, and thank you for the
opportunity to address you directly to advocate for
the people of Eastern Bay of Plenty with cancer, and I'm sure you'll know
or everyone will know in the room someone who knows someone, if not directly
connected to cancer, which is New Zealand's greatest health issue.
People who face, in the Eastern Bay of Plenty, significant
and avoidable barriers to treatment.
Access is simply not equitable. So when we look at
travel time and lack of appropriate accommodation near primary treatment
centers, these are proven contributors to
non-completion of treatment, interruption, and worse survival, which is
why we see a trifecta, and your previous submitters have talked to
the same things. A trifecta of issues in the Eastern Bay of Plenty.
When you look at 73% of the population have high health needs, high
deprivation, high Māori, high rural, and late
cancer diagnosis and poorer outcomes than the national average in the
Eastern Bay of Plenty. It is quite the hotspot.
So in
overview, as a result, Cancer Society Waikato Bay of
Plenty absolutely supports and strongly supports the Trust Horizon
Variation bill. Crucially, it will enable Trust
Horizon to receive applications from us or from others
who are seeking to deliver critical projects that
benefit the people of Eastern Bay of Plenty.
And in the world of cancer, where everything's complex and
names of drugs are so hard to pronounce,
there are practical and simple solutions to improving
outcomes. And Cancer Society is ready to
go to substantively improve the outcomes now and
intergenerationally for the Eastern Bay of Plenty, with a
project to provide free accommodation near Torona.
You may or may
not know,
but Bay of Plenty is the only region in New Zealand that has full specialist
cancer treatment, that 95% of the population of the Bay stay in the Bay
for treatment, and it's the only region in New Zealand that does
not have accommodation near treatment that's free, accessible,
supportive, and improves wellbeing outcomes.
So doing that for the Eastern Bay, where distance
is the barrier, is the key barrier.
It's not like the treatment isn't available, but distance is a barrier,
is critical to overcoming inequities and
simple things like getting access to treatment every day for weeks on end.
Families currently face substantive hidden costs and
issues that we don't surface around fuel,
accommodation, childcare, and loss of income, just by accessing the
treatment that's there.
The project that we would propose, and in the submission as an
overview, is free accommodation for patients and whanau from the
Eastern Bay. It's transport to treatment when they're there.
It's nutritious meals. It's wraparound care.
It's integrated counseling, social care,
belonging.
We also are planning to future-proof so we can care for
other disease states as well. This has operated
successfully around the country.
Cancer Society accommodation is not
just a charitable nice-to-have. It is essential health
infrastructure that is proven to improve outcomes.
Analysis on our organization shows $4.60 return for
every $1 invested. A third of the patients
that will stay in our proposed lodge will be from the Eastern Bay of
Plenty. It will be transformative for the Eastern Bay of
Plenty. And this billEnables a
proportionate and targeted way to potentially unlock
funding that could advance health equity for the Eastern
Bay of Plenty.
You could expect by approving this bill and unlocking that
type of funding, you could expect to achieve things like
earlier detection of cancer, improved treatment adherence, reduced
hospital admissions, lower financial hardship, improved mental
health, direct benefit to Eastern Bay.
So
overview in closing,
and you can tell this is a cause close to my heart, but cancer
diagnosis is not a single clinical event.
It is prolonged, it's demanding, it places immense strain on
individuals, on whanau and communities.
And without access to safe accommodation, holistic support, people
suffer unnecessarily. Inequalities deepen.
We're ready to meet a clear and urgent need that's
evidence-based, cost-effective, and strongly aligned with all
of our shared goals around equity.
So we urge you to support this bill
to enable Trust Horizon to play a far more substantive role
in its community to improve outcomes now and in
the future.
Ideally, what we all want is that no one faces cancer
alone,
and we leave a legacy a better place than where we started.
I'll end it there. Any questions welcome.
Oh, thank you very much, Helen. Thank you for a powerful submission.
Certainly, something I think all of us
can really resonate with. Certainly, my region in Southland,
cancer is a huge issue, I know right across the country, and those around
distance and accessibility are massive for
families. So thank you very much.
I think you've articulated yourself very well to the point that the committee
doesn't have any specific questions for you. So, thank you.
Thank you.
And thank you for all the work you do. Mm-hmm.
Thank you for all your time. Much appreciated.
Thank you.
All right, our next submitter. Are we online?
Is Anna online?
I'm not really here.
We don't really get much to go online, so we've got two for five.
Excellent. Good morning, Anna, and welcome to the Social Services and
Select Committee.
We have you for five minutes this morning to make your submission.
And when you're ready,
I think your microphone's
currently off, so when you can figure out how to get or at least we can do it on-
Okay. There's a very sticky button.
Excellent. All right.
Good morning.
No, welcome. So look, the time is yours.
Great. Thank you.
So hello, everybody. I'm joining you-
Hello.
Hi, Helen.
Hi. Nice to see you again.
Good to see you. So I am joining from Auckland.
I'm no longer living in Helen's electorate.
But I thought it would be helpful to set the scene by saying that I did
meet Helen in her office three years ago this week,
actually. So I was appointed to the board of a
registered charity in late
2022 when the Charities Amendment bill was
going through the House.
And I made a written submission which conveyed some
support. And then when I made an oral
submission, I expressed my concerns about the government
and parliamentary processes associated with the bill.
And then I went as far as saying the bill should be withdrawn.
And then it was a few weeks later that I met with Helen, trying to just make
sense of how that situation had come about.
My professional background is I have worked
most recently in, I guess, operational governance roles
and as an in-house lawyer.
So in terms of private acts of Parliament, I
was the Eden Park Trust's commercial services
advisor during the Rugby World Cup period.
So my job was really to help them to bring the Eden Park
Amendment Act of 2009 to life.
So I appreciate the value of really well-designed,
well-crafted, well-worded legislation.
So really, I'm here today to express my concerns
about the parliamentary processes associated with the
development of this bill,
and I thought it would be helpful to refer to the
submissions that the Parliamentary Counsel Office has made to the
Standing Orders Committee.
So on the 22nd of October
2025, if you listen to that
recording, there's a couple of timestamps that I
thought would be of interest to your secretariat team.
At 1 hour 7 minutes 43 seconds,
and 1 hour 11 minutes 31
seconds,
the Chief Parliamentary
Counsel
spoke about the need to formalize the
Parliamentary Counsel office's role on drafting
local and private bills.
They also spoke about the challenges with the current
classifications that distinguish public and
private bills. They've both been
subject to public benefit entity reporting
standards.
But those words were not around in 2005 when the
Charities Act
was enacted.
So
I guess reading between the lines, drawing on my experience in the sector as
well as a professional in other contexts, I can see
that it seems as though this bill hasprogressed
without appropriate scrutiny and expert
assistance by the Parliamentary Counsel Office.
So, I do not support the promoter's recommendation
that the private bill proceed in the form that it was
introduced to the House.
I'd also like to
highlight that-- So I guess I have concerns about the way the
bill was disclosed to the House when it was first presented.
I also have concerns about the disclosures of the
32 written submissions to the public.
Submissions were due by the 9th of April.
They've only been published via the Parliament website today, which is eight
working days later, on the day of the public hearing, which makes it
harder for people like me to bring different thoughts together and help you with
your processes.
And I guess just to close it out,
one submission of interest is the written submission about Graeme
Weston. I understand he'll be following me, but I think his
submission raises topics that do deserve expert
scrutiny.
And I guess just in closing,
this committee was referred to as the Rubber Stamp
Committee after the Charities Amendment Bill was passed.
So really my call is not to use your rubber stamp
straight away. I think these matters deserve
proper scrutiny for the benefit of this particular
registered charity, the people it affects, and the broader sector.
Thank you, Anna. Interesting submission.
I would gently push back on the rubber stamp categorizations.
We've made a number of recommendations in my time in this role.
Our committee has recommended various things to Parliament, so we take
all submissions like yours on board and listen to seriously. But thank you.
Yeah. Okay.
I'll just make one quick comment.
Sorry. Just to wrap about your comments relating to the
PCO
involvement in this process. PCO have been involved in this process.
As part of the process to introduce a bill, it must be
scrutinized by PCO, and they do have involvement in the preamble as
well through the clerk's office. So there's a whole process that
a bill goes through before it gets introduced to the House, which it has been
through.
So if there are specific issues there, then we
could look at that, but it definitely has been through that process.
I just wanted to cover that off for you.
Yeah. I guess I could highlight some really simple points about the
design and the drafting. So I think the preamble
of the bill is far too long
and disproportionate to the length of preambles in other private
bills or acts of Parliament.
Another design point is that
in the Eden Park Trust Amendment Bill of
2009 that I was referring to, I think the whole replacement
deed was published in a schedule. And when
that formatting is used, it makes it much more
user-friendly for the people that then use
that legislation because it's published holistically
on the New Zealand Legislation website, which has been relaunched on the 8th
of March, rather than just incremental changes, which is
not particularly helpful for the governors of today and the
future.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. A quick question.
Thank you very much, Anna, for your submission.
And it has raised
quite a lot of thinking in my own head.
I haven't quite got it together given how soon
you've submitted. But I'm just wondering now,
and I've raised this with other submitters,
about the broadening of the charitable purpose to such an
extent that are we looking at a whole new
trust charitable purpose rather than an amendment
to an existing one with quite a narrow charitable purpose?
Yeah. So you touch on very important topics that I don't
have the deep expertise in. So I guess my
high-level recommendation to involve the Parliamentary Counsel Officers, it
may be that they need to engage other experts in the
background. I am due to reappear before this committee
later in the morning about the other similar private bills, so we
could perhaps revisit the themes then, and you've got a bit more time to think
about it as well. But yeah, you're hitting on the fundamental point,
and these points were covered in Sue Barker's report that I've
referenced in my written submission.
Yep. Thank you.
Thank you, Anna. We look forward to seeing you on the next one.
Okay, thanks.
Thanks, Anna.
Okay, thanks. Bye.
Our next submitter is Graeme Weston via Zoom.
Is
he
there? Okay.
Good morning.
Good morning, Graeme. Welcome.
All right. We
can see and hear you loud and clear. So we have five minutes for you this morning.
So the time is yours.
Thank you. ""Kou putuaki te moana.
Kou tarawera te awa. Kou tuwharetoa ki kawerau te
iwi. Kou tangata titiriti te hapu.""
Kou Graeme Weston ahau. Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou
katoa.
Chair and members of the committee, the trustee sets out
three clear elementsFirst, the purpose,
to benefit electricity consumers.
Second, the application of funds,
confined to energy-related purposes.
And third, the trustee duties to act in
beneficiaries' interests by giving effect to those first two
provisions.
Those are express limitations. They must be given
their ordinary meaning and full effect.
The proposed variation would remove or dilute that constraint.
That is not administrative or clarifying.
It is a change in purpose. Such a change requires
a high threshold.
The onus lies with the applicants to demonstrate that the existing purpose
is no longer workable or no longer serves
beneficiaries. That case has not been established.
On the contrary, this submission demonstrates that this
existing purpose remains both workable and highly
relevant, and capable of delivering tangible
benefits to consumers if properly
applied.
This is reinforced by the joint letter of 24 February of this year
from the Electricity Authority, the Commerce Commission, and the
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority, which highlights the
role of non-network solutions and
consumer participation, demonstrating that the existing
purpose remains directly aligned with current
regulatory direction.
An accumulation of funds does not evidence failure of
purpose. It indicates that the purpose has not yet been fully
utilized.
The appropriate response is to give effect to it, not to
broaden it.
In those circumstances, necessity for variation
is not made out.
Accordingly, on a strict interpretation of the deed, the
existing limitation should be preserved.
If I may
offer,
may I acknowledge a positive step in this process?
The chief executive of Trust Horizon has approved a three and a half
percent loan to MRI for a solar and battery
system. That is exactly the type of energy-related
intervention the deed already enables.
It shows the purpose works when applied.
Thank you.
Thank you, Graham. Appreciate it. Does anyone have any...
Warren?
I'm just wondering about that letter that you referred
to, Graham,
the joint letter that was written. Can you give us the authors again?
It was EECA-
Okay. So I actually sent it to
the committee services, and they said that they would
have it with you. It's-
So I might be able to-
Attached.
It's attached as a late amendment.
It came out after I put my submission in, and
as you've-
Yeah.
No, I know. We've got it now. No, thank you.
Just didn't come in the papers that we get the night before.
But no, we've got it. No, look, thanks, Graham.
We have a quick question from Scott.
Thank you, Graham. So
effectively you're saying, and I agree, that there are so many ways
in which we can have benefit through energy
smarts and
the intention for distributed energy is...
Well, the potential for distributed energy is enormous.
So effectively
what you're suggesting is that what's occurred
has just been a poor
delivery of, and a missed opportunity here,
and that the
existing purpose is effective enough, it's just the
capacity to deliver that purpose which is lacking.
Is that
what you're suggesting?
Yeah, look, it's really unfortunate.
In the last five years, so many things have changed in the
electricity sector, and there are huge opportunities now
presenting which probably weren't available a
decade ago when Trust Horizon
set up the way they operate the trust.
And the trust has been operating on a commercial
type basis,
and they've done very well. I mean,
evidence the accumulation of funds at
achieving those
purposes, those roles or whatever.
But
now
that we are confronted with two-way energy flows, that's putting
all sorts of stresses on the electricity network,
and
there is a lot of
folk in senior levels who...
And I mention FlexForum as an example of how they've got
together and they're struggling with how are we going to apply the
rules that were set up decades ago that do
not apply now. And they've been busy.
It's been interesting watching the deck chairs get fiddled around.
But
there's going to be some major changes required, and
it's really quite opportune, and I
thank Trust Horizon for persisting in this,
because what it means is we get to talk to people like
yourself, because you're the guys who are going to be able to
help us through this
transitionAnd
I'm not sure if I've answered your question.
Oh, yeah. Well, thank you, Graham.
And we are now a bit over time, but, look, thank you for making your
submission this morning to the committee.
Thank you.
Right. Our next submitter is Hospice East Bay of
Plenty.
Right.
By Zoom as well.
Morning. Sorry about that.
Yeah. How are you?
Yeah, good, thank you.
Excellent. All right. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, so, the time is
yours.
Yeah. I probably won't take 10 minutes of your time just because, a lot of what I
was going to say has already been said really by a few of the other
panelists. But, yeah.
Bryce Takurua.
I'm privileged to be the CE at Hospice here in Bay of Plenty, Eastern Bay of
Plenty. I moved here about 12 years ago, and it's changed my
life,
just for the people that are here. So it's one of those places that really gets
under your skin, and I don't think I'll ever leave.
I know you've all read the submission that we've put through.
Firstly, I think that we need to acknowledge the impact that Trust
Horizons have had on our community up until now.
I've been lucky enough and privileged enough to have a few leadership roles over
the years I've lived here in the health sector.
And Trust Horizons have been a big part in helping change people's lives.
So it's been a real privilege to be able to stand up here today and say
thank you to them and to promote the change of
the bill, really.
I guess the other thing that, I won't go through all the demographics and the
population and, Dana and everyone else has done that perfectly.
I guess the things that I think about the most when it comes to
this process is that there's a lot of stuff in the background that doesn't get
seen, and
Eastern Bay is full of people that are great with number eight wire
and get things done when they don't have anything to do it with.
And we've noticed this. And while I've been at Hospice, it's been about two and a
half years, and we've sort of grown dramatically from serving 25
patients to 100 patients at a time in the last two
years. We are funded the same as we were two years ago.
We're 42% funded by The Crown through Te Whatu
Ora.
We've recently been told that there will be no
uplift in funding until at least 2029 through Te Whatu Ora.
We've gone from having a clinical team of three to a clinical team of
14,
which is at huge cost. We drive about nearly 300,000 kilometers a
year. That's what we're aiming at this year across the Eastern Bay to serve our
community and deliver our free service.
I guess the other part of the thing that hasn't been mentioned
about all the statistics is that
through health in general, a lot of our Eastern Bay
services that are partly funded by Te Whatu Ora or wholly funded by
Te Whatu Ora,
aren't funded in the same way as other areas.
So I can only speak on behalf of us because that's where I am.
So
for an example, in the Western Bay of Plenty, Waipuna Hospice
is funded six times more than us, yet they have four times the
population, and there's nothing taken into account around
deprivation or distances or all those sorts of things.
So
I guess that the change to go from just energy
purposes to other areas would be
helpful for, and obviously hospice, but other services in our
community. That in the long run would make a huge
benefit to our
country and how we spend, really. So I think mainly about hospital
admissions. If we can make sure that our
health services have the ability to deliver the need, we
are able to stop that clog up in the hospital.
And,
I sit on the IOC meeting every morning with the Whakatane and
Tauranga Hospital. And I don't think it's been under
112%
for a couple of months now. It's pretty dire in there, and ED's getting smashed and
all those things. So I guess that, on behalf of
Hospice, but more so on behalf of our community,
to be able to look at other options
for funding, whether that be small or large, would make a huge difference
for people and actually changes lives for people.
A good example of that is that our board has
decided that we would employ a doctor even though we're not funded for that.
So we have a GP. Bear with me, I know this is a long story, but I'll get through
before the six minutes is up, I promise.
We employ a GP because we have 14 general practices in the
Eastern Bay of Plenty, and four of them don't have a doctor.
So they have a telehealth doctor sometimes or a locum doctor or just a nurse
practitioner. So access to that stuff is really hard.
So as a hospice, we have no choice because to change medications
for a person who is
at the end stages there and to look after their whanau, we have to act
quickly. So we have no choice but to do that.
And that's why we run deficits of between $400,000 and
$600,000 a year after our fundraising.
So I guess it's about
looking at options about... I
know there's a lot of politics
and a lot of legislation and all that tied up in it, and that's not my expertise,
clearly. But I guess this is about changing lives as well, and I think that's
probably one of the most important things to think about when we look
at-How we make change, I
guess. And I guess it has to be lawful and all those sorts of things.
But Energy Trust already do amazing things, and we've
scolded them for everything we can so far.
So we've got beds for our whanau. We deliver hospital beds
into whanau's homes every day, no matter where that is.
And it makes a huge difference for someone's end of life.
So I guess other health providers and other providers in our
community, that it would make a difference for them in the same way,
whatever that is. So I guess it's about,
I'm very much coming from a grassroots, community-focused
position on this. And we love what the Energy Trust
does, and you don't have to
walk too far to see how they've already impacted our community
in every area of it. Right up the coast to in town, to
Kaweroa, wherever.
But yeah, if there's a possibility to
impact people's lives for the better in a little more
broader scope, we're all for it. And I just wanted to make sure
that
there was some sort of grassroots kind of feeling in there about why
this is important for our community.
And, I
run into Dana a bit, and she's out there always looking after our community as
well. But it's these small steps to make huge
changes for people's lives. So I guess that's all I wanted to put out there,
really. I
feel like it's not as well prepared as the last speaker or the one before that.
Christ, it's hard coming up last, right? But, yeah.
I guess it's about people for me, and this is one way that that can change.
So thanks for your time. I appreciate the opportunity.
Brilliant. Thanks, Bryce, and thanks for that grassroots submission.
And it sounds like, I think, well, you've found a home, but it
sounds like home has found you as well.
It sounds like the community
are lucky to have you there as well.
Absolutely.
Thank you for your work. Amazing.
So I do have a question from Scott.
Oh.
Yeah. Thank you, Bryce. Great
submission. So obviously the health
sector's needing funding, and hospice has benefited
for the energy side. But what do you think about
before people get to hospital, the investment in
energy services, like deep retrofits for
homes, elderly and energy poverty,
helping with heat pumps, et cetera, and the types of investments
that the trust could and can already do and is already doing, but could do more
of that is really limiting or keeping people
at home rather than in a hospice or in hospital, enabling
more of that community care. That's something that's
already happening, but that's also something we should consider, do you think?
Oh, definitely. And I think they
already do that really well.
I think that's something that they do an amazing job of already.
I could probably name 10 or 15 people that I know personally that
have been through that process. And I try not to go out and
talk to too many people, so I get tired all the time.
But I
think what they do is all-- I don't think this is about not doing what they already
do. What I see from this submission is about, it's about being able
to add some extra bonuses on top of other
areas. And I think
what they're doing now with the, especially the insulation and the
heat pumps, has been a,
I think they've-- I used to work for the
Tawanui Housing Trust here. I helped set that up here when I first moved here.
And I was probably a part of
hundreds of
homes where they went in and paid for the
insulation and heat pumps. I don't think that's something that they're not doing,
and I think they're probably doing it really well.
So yeah, I guess that's kind of the answer.
Excuse, Bryce. Maureen?
Just a quick one.
Thank you, Bryce, and absolutely thank you for the work that you
do in the community.
I just wonder,
in reading your submission, you've quoted a couple of projects
that you've successfully applied to the Horizon Trust for.
Yeah.
But you say there's other things that you could do, like you could use operational
costs. And I understand that they've provided grants
for electricity use-
Yeah
... to certain people. But also the vehicles.
Have you thought about applying for a fleet of EVs?
Yeah. So we have gone down that path.
We've actually ended up going with
hybrid vehicles because we don't have the infrastructure to where
we go. So we spend probably 70% of our time
north of Tekaha or north of Opoutere,
and up in Ruatahuna.
So I'm not really willing to put my nurses in the position of being
where they can't charge. So-
No, I wasn't expecting that for the long range vehicles, but the
hybrids. So have you applied to the trust for funding for that?
We applied to the trust for funding for a hybrid ute, which
was declined.
But we got it through someone else.
Good.
But we've, yeah. So we actually have a full
hybrid fleet. So our board were very keen when we,
about two years ago, to make sure that we were running as
efficiently as we could, and we wanted to make sure we bought local and everything
as well. So we moved all our... We asked for about $1.7 million from
our community a year. So we made sure that we spent in our community
as well. So
yeah.
All right. Although we are at time, but thank you very much, Bryce, and I
think on behalf of all of us, thank you for the work you're doing in your community
as well. Much appreciated.
Likewise.
Thank you.
Thanks, Bryce.
Ka kite whanau
All right, next speaker is Victor Luca. Last but absolutely not least.
Thank you-
Dr.
I hear. Dr. Victor Luca.
Good morning. Yeah, that's correct.
As my written submission points out, I spent 20 years in
the energy industry.
I was approached in the middle of 2025 to
write a letter supporting
this undertaking. Since I've had more time to think about it,
I'm going to do a complete 180-degree
about-face.
The money that
Trust Horizon dishes out comes from energy-related
activities, and so I believe it should go back there.
That was the ethos that underpinned
the trust deed in the first place, and I think it's quite
absolutely appropriate.
There's already significant under-investment by all actors in the
electricity system. The last thing we need to do is
de-focus.
There's no shortage of stuff to do in the electricity space, especially in the
security and resilience area, which I've written about and Graham Weston
mentioned. What's required is a little bit of imagination.
So that's where the trust's focus should be.
I'm no longer in favor of broadening its scope.
Electricity is a common good. We all need
it.
Our society wouldn't function without it.
Almost everything we do wouldn't work if we didn't have it.
Whether you're providing health services,
running a business,
communicating with others, playing sport, just trying to live, or just
trying to keep warm in the winter, you need electricity.
And it's becoming more important as we try to replace fossil fuels,
especially from our transport system.
We need to electrify everything, and we need to help people do it.
We need to provide charity for people to do it.
We need to maximize focus on energy, not less focus.
In my town, a lot of people are still burning wood.
It's like
caveman era. And they do that just to keep warm, and one of the
reasons I hear that they do it is for affordability.
So in terms of heating, I think there's a lot more to be done.
Clean heating. There's been reports over the last few
years about the health effects of breathing in
wood smoke, and my neighbor next door to me, when the wind blows from the south, I
end up eating all of his smoke. He uses wood because it's
cheaper. Much more needs to be done in the transport sector.
Twenty five percent of my district are still driving around in diesel trucks, which
is all fine while there is diesel, but soon we may be faced with the
prospect of no diesel and people and trucks not being able to get to the
supermarket. So I wouldn't underestimate that. We don't know where it's going.
GDP per capita is strongly correlated with energy consumption per
capita. You don't have an economy if you don't have energy.
So if you want to be a developed country, you can't do it without abundant and
cheap energy.
If the problem that the trust has is that it's unable to
spend what it accumulates, then in my opinion, the trust should get
more proactive in scoping out the many projects that could be done and
helping
people to do it.
This gets down to a little bit about what
Member Maureen had said,
and I've got it in front of me. I had it before she spoke.
The trust could even set up a small research unit to assist people.
I think that there are a lot that could be done out
there in the energy space, especially electricity,
if people were just made aware of it.
So I believe that the objects of the trust are already sufficiently broad,
that quite a wide range of charitable activities are permitted.
After all, electricity is involved in almost
everything we do.
As an example, Trust Horizon helped finance an X-ray
CT scanner in our hospital.
That was allowed under the existing
situation. So it's already pretty broad.
So we're in the midst now of what has all the hallmarks of being a major disruption
to the world energy system with potentially catastrophic economic
consequences for New Zealand, given that its dependency on liquid
fuels is about 80% or more. So this,
I think, is where the
trust needs to focus its charity work.
What's coming down the pike is looking pretty ugly, and it's going to put
severe strain on our communities and make the cost of living crisis
even worse. We should be using all means at our disposal to
alleviate pressure on the average
community member. We need more energy
charity, not less. And I'm worried that by
allowing the trust to broaden its scope beyond what it already
is, which is,
what is it? Energy-related purposes.
Purposes that relate to some aspect of the beneficial use,
application, or enjoyment in the district of New Zealand's energy...
Well, that's so broad, you can drive a truck through it.
I really don't think that you need to broaden it any more.
I think we need more focus on electricity.
It couldn't be more important than it is today, and
I'd like to see it stay where it is. Thank you.
No, thank you, Victor. You're bang on time, but I will indulge one
question.
Well, I'll cede to Scott.
I'll cede to Scott. Okay. Yeah.
Because Dr. Luca's answered my question.
Oh, there you go. Perfect. Okay.
Thank you, Victor. Excellent submission. Really appreciate it.
So effectively, you've moved from supporting
the variation to opposing it
because you've realized that, well,
you've offered so many other opportunities where we could invest, and you've
seen these in the community that aren't being invested as.
Is it a question of the trust not
having the understanding and the ability to implement
The purpose of the trust as it is now, given
the changing global situation we're in.
Is that
where the problem sits?
Well, I think part of the problem is that the trust is not equipped to actually
help people realize what potentially could be
available. So
I think it almost needs a little research unit
that actually went out and proactively look
for energy related projects to invest and
not just sit back and say, "Oh, well, we receive these, and then
we'll do some sort of selection process and whittle them down." Actually
go out and look for it, because people out there don't know what's possible.
Mm-hmm.
And so, I think that that's where things
could have a more serious impact. I
don't know. We're faced with a calamity at
the moment. We
take energy for granted. We take electricity for granted while it works.
But
we haven't had our eyes on the ball, because we wouldn't be in the situation we're
in, if we did. So I think we need to do a bit of
forward thinking and some of that work in the security.
There's nothing more important than energy security. Energy is money.
Money is energy. That's what it is.
So I think we need full focus on that, not to defocus.
But as I said, as it is, it's already quite broad.
Almost everything plugs in somewhere.
You can-
Oh, sorry, Doctor. But we are-
Yeah
... briefly over time now.
Yeah. I won't give you a lecture. All right.
No, I know.
Good morning.
You made a very good submission, very clear.
And thank you for doing that. And you're not wrong.
We are in the midst of a historic disruption-
Right
... to global energy supplies, which
it does require fresh thinking and a lot of things for the entire
world. But look, thank you very much for your submission this morning.
All right, members, I propose that we move straight into submissions next,
because we're actually supposed to start that at 10:30.
And then we can do the-
Yeah, that's probably-
... advice-
Yeah
... for both bills at the end.
Okay.
If that works.
Excellent. All right. Honorable Megan Woods.
Thank you.
Louise.
Yep. Live stream.
Yes. Yeah.
All right. Well, good
morning, and welcome again to Social Services Committee.
And we are now looking at the Ōtautahi Community Housing Trust Trust Variation
Bill.
And first up, we have the Honorable Dr.
Megan Woods, who's sponsoring, a member of Parliament for this bill.
And we have 10 minutes with you this morning.
So you're welcome.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the committee for considering this bill.
This bill's doing one very simple thing.
It is seeking to amend the
legislation that covers the Ōtautahi Community Housing Trust to
allow it to expand its operations beyond Christchurch City and Banks
Peninsula, which is where it is defined within the original trust deed.
Now, I do want to commend the trust.
They did look at many other options for expanding this
geographic scope before coming back and looking for a local
bill. They looked at what other legal options were available
to them in terms of seeking to amend the trust deed through
the High Court. The advice they received is that although they were
very unlikely to succeed, because it's in
the very purpose of the original legislation that this is to
build social housing within the
defined geographical parameters of Christchurch City,
and Banks Peninsula. The genesis for this
comes through the sort of discussions when I
was Minister of Housing, having with mayors in the Canterbury region,
recognizing the OCHT, or Ōtautahi Community Housing
Trust, had significant expertise
and experience in building social housing,
but also affordable housing. So looking at
shared equity schemes, affordable housing beyond
income-related rent subsidy housing as well.
And not wanting to reinvent wheels, the mayors of the greater Canterbury
region were, "Well, why can't OCHT just come down to Ashburton
or Timaru, and build housing in our area?" They
couldn't because of the trust deed.
So that was the genesis for this bill.
And so it seeks to change those definitions of where it can operate.
It does imagine also the way in which we need to
think about if there were an eventuality with winding
up, how it is that we could protect those communities where the
greater expansion of housing had gone into.
So, for example, if there had been
social or community housing that had been built in
Ashburton, for example, that it wouldn't then
revert to the people of the City of Christchurch if it had been funded out of
Ashburton. So it looks to protect the communities that may
be looking to establish that housing in their areas.
Also, the governance. The original trust,
it
specifically names the governance roles within the
trust being of people from
Christchurch City and Banks Peninsula.
It now seeks to expand that to areas where the trust has
housing interests. So it not just being a concentration of people in
Christchurch City and Banks Peninsula.
One of the questions that I discussed with the trust when they were
having this bill drafted is that this opens
up the geographical scopeIt can
build anywhere now. It doesn't give a defined geographical space.
One of the things I would be interested in the select committee
looking at, and would be keen to get some feedback from you on,
is do we need to define that? Do we need to expand it, but
define it?
Or is it just more of a future-proofing of the bill to say that
they can build wherever they've got a relationship and not have
to come back and go through this process all over again?
I'm happy to take questions. That really describes what the bill says, and I would
like to thank all the parties across the house that supported this
legislation.
Thank you very much. Very clear, succinct submission.
Yeah.
Any questions from the board?
So just thank you.
I'm not sure what to call you.
Megan.
While you're here.
Honorable member.
Yeah.
Honorable Dr. Megan.
Thank you for that. I do have a question about the distribution-
Yeah
... in the case of a wind-up. So,
the charitable purpose-
Yeah
... and the geographic area. So this bill is
also proposing that the wind-up clause
be changed.
Yeah.
But that could be problematic in terms of the
proportion of... So how do you envisage, or how
does the trust envisage-
So I think-
... proportionality in terms of-
Yeah. So I think if we wind it back to the intent,
for example, if 20 houses
were built in Ashburton-
Yeah
... and the trust, for some reason, was wound up, that those
20 houses would be transferred to the people of
Ashburton.
Okay.
That they would stay within that local area-
Okay
... rather than being transferred and becoming an asset of Christchurch City.
So that could be clarified and-
Yep, and be really keen to get advice-
Yeah
... if that does need strengthening. Yeah.
Thank you.
Anyone else? No, I think it's
very clear. So thank you, Honorable Dr. Megan Woods.
Thank you.
Our
next one is the Ōtautahi Community Housing Trust.
Are they here in person or what?
Online.
Kate's flight was canceled this morning, so I think they're online.
Oh.
Long story of our lives.
Yes, it is.
Yeah. And we did the trust build and she'll be back on track now.
Oh, great.
But they'll be coming on.
Roughly, yeah.
Quite early, so we might see them next.
Oh, okay. Sweet.
In
a minute.
All right.
Good morning, Kate. Sorry to hear about your flight issues.
It's someone that's quite familiar with members of the committee but
unfortunately. But look, I'm glad you could make it online.
And we have 10 minutes with you this morning, so look, the time is yours when
you're ready.
Wonderful. Thank you very much for the welcome, and thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak today. So my name is Kate
Kearney. I'm the Chief Executive of the Ōtautahi Community Housing
Trust.
I'm here in support of the bill and also as the sponsor of the bill.
Happy to answer any questions and happy to take away any considerations
about where we might see opportunities to strengthen
the bill.
We really welcome the committee's focus on process and scrutiny.
It's an important part of getting this legislation right.
And believe me, we have been working on this for three years, so we really do want
to get it right. We're proposing a very narrow
technical amendment to remove an outdated geographic restriction
that was placed in our founding deed.
It doesn't change our purpose, our governance, or our obligations to the
communities we serve.
Ultimately, it's just about enabling us to respond to requests from
other communities while maintaining our strong focus on
Christchurch.
In fact, through the process, we have actually taken a lot of
advice.
The reason we are only proposing a very minor
technical change is that our advice has been that every other
change that we may wish to make can be made through the Charities Commission.
We have also sought advice from the Charities Commission through this process to
make sure that we get the drafting of the bill right.
What we've been advised is that a private bill is the only viable
mechanism to make this change.
Again, we've had extensive legal advice, second and third
opinions,
and been told that standard trust variation or High Court
processes would not result in a variation to our
geographical boundary.
We have followed the process carefully and deliberately knowing it's important,
because getting it right will mean communities will have access to a
proven service delivery model and a proven
provider of social and affordable community housing.
We've been around for about a decade now.
We're about to have our anniversary in a few months, and we have started from
scratch. We've built a service delivery model that works.
It brings together social housing development, tenancy
management, facilities and asset management, and
long-term stewardship to deliver stable outcomes for tenants,
and supports the growth of affordable housing
over the long term.
We have grown, and we've been very financially disciplined through the process.
We have very strong governors who scrutinize all of
the opportunities that we take to them and who ensure that the
governance of the trust is strong and that we're going to be here for the next
50 years. We're also highly regulated being a community housing
provider, but we've also adopted international standards of
operations.
Other communities have actually seen our work, and they have
asked us whether we can work with them.
At present, the answer is no, because our operations cannot
extend outside the boundaries of Christchurch City and Banks
Peninsula.This bill removes that barrier, and it
is the only change apart from the distribution of
funds, that I'll come back to at the end,
that we are proposing. It actually emerged through the Greater
Christchurch Partnerships, where councils across the wider
Canterbury region identified the value of asking us to partner with
them. The Christchurch City Council has formally supported this
direction, and we continue to receive approaches from South Island
districts seeking to explore working with us to tackle the
unmet housing need.
How we respond really matters. We have a housing crisis,
and we want to go where we are needed.
But we do not seek to operate or take over where there are other local
partners.
We are also not seeking to displace existing
community housing providers.
Our role is to work alongside councils, iwi, and community
organizations, and to add capacity where it is
needed. This bill is an enabler. It means we can
respond where we are needed and where partnerships work.
From a startup to a mature, regulated community housing
provider, we have led from the front.
We manage over 2,500 houses. We support
more than 2,800 tenants. We have built almost
400 homes around the Christchurch community over the
past 10 years. We have reinvested
significantly in improving and building affordable housing.
This bill does not create new Crown obligations, and it's really
important to say that. It actually places the responsibility
back on us
and on our governors to operate efficiently and sustain
any delivery over time, or any district where we might go
to,
to further
supply new housing.
Any growth for us will be very deliberate and disciplined.
We will only operate in areas where we were invited
and where we can see that partnership will benefit the community.
So Christchurch is our home, and that's really important
too. Even if we were operating somewhere else in the South Island,
there is not the need as there is in Christchurch City.
Two and a half thousand homes, it's our base.
It's where we will always be.
Finally, I'd like to address the asset distribution.
The trust is bound by charitable law.
So what this means is all assets must be applied to charitable
purposes, i.e. housing, in the event of a wind up.
If the trust was operating in districts outside of Christchurch, as
Megan said, we'd like to see what has been built in
those districts returned to those districts, so passed to
a similar entity who can look after the homes and the people
living in those homes.
In practical terms, assets generated in Christchurch will stay in
Christchurch. Assets generated elsewhere will be
ring-fenced as being for those districts.
In summary, we've proposed a simple technical
amendment to our trust deed to remove
something that is getting in the way of us responding to a request to
help other communities.
It does not create any new obligations for any parties.
It does not transfer any risk to the Crown.
It enables a proven organization to respond where it is
needed and where it is invited.
We believe that it is in the public interest,
for now and well into the future.
Thank you very much for listening to me.
I'm happy to take any questions if there are any.
Thank you very much, Kate, and yeah, I think we're all
very much aware of how much value community housing trusts provide.
So thank you for that. I have a question for Maureen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you very much for your
submission, Kate. I just have
one question about capability, and the organization has grown quite
quickly, and it's
had a great influence in the Christchurch area.
So, can you think of any
operational or financial risks maybe that
you could experience in terms of the scaling up and moving
outside the Christchurch area?
Thank you very much for the question. Of course, you know I'm going to say no.
In fact- ... we have spent a great deal of time ensuring that we
have very strong, robust processes internally.
We have very strong, robust processes with our board, with our committees,
especially around finance and any new opportunity.
If we were to go outside of Christchurch, we would only be going where we can
actually manage that additional work.
So at the moment, we
are quite different from other community housing providers.
You probably remember from when you came to visit, we actually have in-house
specialists who help us with development.
We have a very large and very capable tenancy management team.
We have very robust systems. Those systems are scalable,
and they're available to be used remotely.
So we think we're in a really strong position.
It's taken us 10 years to get here, but I think we're really confidently
able to say we can do more.
Now you're on the record.
I just have a supplementary to that.
Yes.
So the select committee process or parliamentary process is a last
resort in terms of amending a trust deed, and
you said that you've got three different legal opinions that are
saying that the High Court process would not be a viable option.
Are you happy to share those legal opinions with us?
We have said that, yes, we're happy to share those.
So at this stage, we've taken the advice from the Office of the Clerk
and Parliamentary Counsel Office,
that they might be requested through this process.
Okay. Thank you.
Excellent. Any other questions? Yes, Karanga.
Kia ora, Kate. Thank you for your work and all of your staff's
work, and all the previous workers as well.
You do a wonderful job in our lovely city,
Ōtautahi.
You talked about partnerships and being invited to
areas where you will expand to. Have you already started those
relationships
with those areas? And do the partnerships
include with the mana whenua or te tiraki wa
of those places?
Kia ora. Thank you very much for the question.
We have already commenced those partnerships in Ōtautahi.
So we have partnered with mana whenua through one of their economic
arms, and we have actually built them homes.
Their capability was in supporting the whanau.
Our capability was in building the homes and supporting
them as they take over that role as landlord.
So yes, we've started those partnerships, and
it's been a great experience for us to be able to work in
partnership and support
really good housing for whanau, actually.
It's been a great community, that particular one.
Thank you. Can I have one more, Chair?
Yes, please.
Thank you.
So when talking to some of the wider districts that you may
go into,
I've had people,
community members, and also councilors and
those
with organizations that care for people, particularly our unhoused
communities or our structurally disadvantaged communities.
And they are concerned around
the move-on orders and what that means for their districts,
people coming in, and them not having the services
like the central city of Christchurch does.
Are these considerations that you're taking when going
into different regions and the partnerships that you're
developing with the regions that you are looking at going into?
Yes, so absolutely. Our purpose in doing this change is to
allow us to build more partnerships with the people on the ground who are serving
the communities. We don't want to go in and say, "Do it this way." We will be
working with local communities to respond to how
they see the need, and we have those partnership models already
embedded in Christchurch. So it's almost taking some of the learning,
especially what we're doing in the homelessness space and with the Housing
First and with working on a rapid rehousing
approach to get people into housing.
We have some learnings that we're really happy to share, but the people on the
ground will be our partners. We're not going to come in and
say, "We know what to do." People will have an understanding
of how to best respond to their whanau.
Thank you. Yes, Pam Sharp and the Rapid Response Team are doing a wonderful
job, aren't they?
They sure are.
Helen, question.
Sorry, just a final question from me.
Megan Woods raised the issue about the geographical definition,
and she was open to the idea of something that
was set or something that was
based on a formula, basically, which meant you'd never have to come back here
if you wanted to build housing in Queenstown, which I know Joseph would
love you to do.
We've got a great community housing trust in Queenstown.
Would you just like to comment on that?
I would agree. You do have one of the best community housing providers in
Queenstown, the best in New Zealand. They're fantastic.
I understand why people might want to consider a restriction.
But really, going through the pain we've gone through for the past three years
and building up to those three years of detailed deep dives,
our hope is that in removing the restriction, we won't come
back and burden you again in 10 or 15 years, when it
looks like we have to go somewhere
else that wasn't in that restricted area.
So ideally, we would like to keep it open.
But that is only because we can't see into the future and where we might be
required to go.
Thank you.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much, Kate.
Really appreciate you making a submission this morning, and thanks for all the work
you're doing in your community.
Thank you.
Our next submitter is Steven McPike, also online.
Sorry about that.
Oh, good morning, Steven. No, good to see you, and welcome.
We have five minutes with you this morning, so the time is yours.
Cool.
My name is Steven McPike. I was a
community housing tenant with OCHT.
My story starts back in March 2016, where my divorce
happened.
I was living on the street, in a car, on people's
couches and garages. I went to the
Ministry of Social Development to see if I could apply for
Housing New Zealand housing, which is now Kāinga Ora.
They wouldn't help me because I earned 50 cents too much.
In April, 10 years ago, I parked outside my local MP's
office.
At 5:00 in the morning, I heard a bang on my window, and she invited
me into her office and helped me get a Christchurch City Council
application for housing.
Ten years ago today, I received a phone call from
Christchurch City Council that I was entitled to a house.
So this was a huge step for me and my son.
I was so happy.
On my birthday, 2016, 3rd of October, OCHT took
over. They had 2,200
units with multiple issues, and they're doing a
massive job of upgrading and
improving
the housing stockIn 2018,
I went to the media about how cold and damp
my unit was.
Within
2019, I ran for mayor to improve council-owned
community housing.
The following year, we all received heat pumps.
That's 2,300 heat pumps that went throughout Christchurch,
thus pumping in not only the $16 million Christchurch City
Council put aside, they also
pumped in about $5 to $6 million a year from
us, the tenants.
And the reporter did a follow-up on these heat pumps, came back to my unit and
noticed the massive difference.
In 2021, I received an award from Ōtāhuhu
Community Housing Trust
for my community work, as well as donating a
trampoline to a much-needed complex.
In 2024, just days after my car got stolen from the
complex I was living at, I had OCHT reach out to me to check
how I was doing, and also offered me a great opportunity of
home ownership through their Secure Homes.
In 2025, Secure Homes opened up Three Lanes in
Lyttelton Street, Summerfield.
And this year, I moved into one of their products.
One of the biggest things over the last few years I have worked with
as being a community advocate is people don't understand the difference
between income related rent subsidies and assisted rentals.
And this is where we have grandparent tenants
from Christchurch City Council days to OCHT days,
just
not understanding, and they need that extra bit of help so they can have
more money in their accounts. And I'm talking more about the elderly
or the young families that need the help.
So that is my concern with OCHT expanding, is
when they go into other communities, I just want to make sure
that those communities are well looked after.
And I know Kate, Bob, Stu, Ed, and the team there
do a fantastic job. They create
communities, not social housing.
They create communities, and that's one of the things that I
respect about OCHT.
Thank you very much, Steven. Look, thank you for a very powerful submission and
for making, I think, a really important point that we'll
absolutely take into consideration and get more advice on.
I don't see any questions around the table specifically.
I think you've laid out your story really clearly and your points,
but thank you very much for coming and doing that this morning.
You're welcome.
All right. Thank you. Our next submitter is Anna Muir. Good. Welcome back, Anna.
Hello again. I don't know if this happens often, but-
Every now and then, but yeah
... yeah. Well, I think it is very positive that you
are hearing these submissions in succession today.
I have noticed that other
bills
that focus specifically on one registered charity have not
necessarily been scrutinized by the Social Services and
Community Committee. So the Takapuna Ice Cream bill
was not. So yeah, it's great that you can consider these topics
holistically today.
It is.
Yes. So I guess just to echo some of my earlier comments
about the parliamentary processes associated with the development
of private bills.
I mentioned the Parliamentary Counsel Officer's
hearing with the Standing Orders Committee last year in the
last hearing.
I should add that if you look at the PCO's written
submissions to the Standing Orders Committee, pages seven
to nine of the appendix or supplementary submission
is the relevant content,
where they highlighted the need to formalize the
PCO's role in drafting
private bills.
From a design and drafting perspective, I've got similar comments
about this bill in that I think that
the preamble could be abbreviated
and the design of the bill could be
improved.
If you request advice from the PCO
about the merits of integrating the full
replacement version of the trust deed in the bill, rather than
the incremental changes that have been presented.
I wanted to pick up on
Maureen's question about winding up.
So I think the
national laws to do with the winding up of registered charities have been
amended recently.
That may have been the law that I think Helen was
on the Select Committee, and Sue Barker made submissions.
So I'd recommend that you do contact the Department of Internal
Affairs for advice about that, specifically Charlotte
Stanley.
When the Select Committee requested advice from the DIA
about the Takapuna Ice Cream bill, that
request didn't go as far as the DIA's Charity
Services team. So for this scenario, we need to make sure
that the Charity Services team provides advice
to your committee.
I'd also like to pick up on Kate Kearney's comments
about the Charities Commission.
She mentioned the Charities Commission
twiceThe problem is the
Charities Commission has been disestablished.
Very controversial, but there's a myth that it still exists.
The reality is, the integrity of the regulatory system
for registered charities is not as strong as what was
envisaged when the Charities Act of 2005 was
enacted.
If you'd like more information about that, you can do a Google search about
reinstate the Charities Commission, and you'll see Sue Barker's
expert
commentary about those topics.
And I'd also like to note how Kate
Kearney mentioned the pain of the last three years,
just progressing these processes to amend the deed.
So really just want to encourage the committee to reflect
on the pain
that the people governing and serving
this important registered charity have faced, as well as all of the
members of parliament. Just think about the time that's been spent in
the House, in the back offices today, and there
are thousands of charities that could benefit from these
sorts of amendments.
Mm.
The reality is the DIA doesn't have information about
the number of registered charities that have even been established by a
private act of parliament.
So yeah, this is the time to speak up and make some positive changes
in all sorts of ways.
Oh, no, thank you very much, Anna, and another excellent submission.
And I can say there's a real interest, as it happens, in the select committee
around
a more streamlined way of allowing-
Anna, we are-
... organizations
We're taking active steps. We're noticing that a lot of these things are
turning up, and we're wondering whether that-
There's a better way to do it
... is a pattern we need to address.
Yeah. No, I can feel the team spirit, so that's great.
It better be political. It's about governance.
In fact, some of us, and definitely myself, spoke about it in the House, in the
last one of these kind of bills we had.
So there is an appetite, absolutely, to look at it, so no.
Look, great submission.
Cross-party.
Thank you very much.
Okay.
Morning.
Great. Thank you.
Please.
All right, our next submitter is Craig Atkinson. Via Zoom.
Kia
ora.
Morning,
Craig.
Welcome. We can see you and hear you loud and clear.
So look, thanks for coming and making a submission this morning.
We have five minutes with you, so the time is yours.
Okay, well, thank you very much. Firstly, I'd just like to acknowledge Steven's
submission. I think that was first class, and I
think that sort of covers the reasons why it's so
important to have these community trusts, and these community trusts to be
fit for purpose.
For myself, Christchurch and all, I was one of the first builders that were
contacted to go down after your first earthquake, and
spent 16, 18 months there. I still have
post-traumatic stress from it, so I'm sure there's a lot of other people down there
that are still struggling massively.
I've spent over three years living in garages and
cars and being homeless,
and it is the most degrading thing that you
can go through, especially sleeping in your vehicle.
So,
when we've got move-on orders and stuff like that where people
are moved on from where they can find safe shelters,
we actually need to be moving them people
into these community trusts,
and so forth, for community housing.
I was really pleased to see that they've got a model working
for ownership, and I think that massively reduces any
risk for the trust that actually...
I've done research before for iwi, and
basically, if they own the land, and a model to
lease the land or rent it at a small cost, it allows people then
to build
more sustainable houses that can be moved to areas then
when, after a period of time, when they can purchase their own land.
So yeah, I think there's a lot of work that we can do in a positive way in the
area, and I think this is a
great proposal and a great thing to support,
and for it to be in further communities and that.
So yeah, that's my submission.
No, excellent. No. Well, thank you, Craig.
I don't see any questions, so you've made your point clearly this morning, so
thanks for coming and making a submission.
Thank you.
Our next submitter is Max Marshall.
Max, come forward, please.
Stand and grab a seat in the middle there.
Okay. Good morning. Welcome, Max.
Morning.
Thanks for coming and making a submission-
Hi
... to the committee this morning. So look, you've heard the drill.
We've got five minutes with you. If you want to leave time for questions, if there
are any, you're welcome to do so, but let's go for it. Get ready.
Well, good morning.
Thank you for the opportunity to talk.
I oppose the bill primarily because I believe the
community housing
model's track record
as landlord is a poor one when property has been
transferred into their hands.
The CHRP model has been attractive to local councils who do not
want the social
responsibilities
of the provision of social housing, but still retain
the property on their portfolio and maximize the investment
through the IRRSIn the paper prepared
by Robert Buchanan, Assistant Auditor General,
Transparency and Accountability in Government Decision-making,
Devolved Service Delivery, he makes the remark that
a collaborative approach does not on its own ensure either transparency
or accountability.
I am interested in social housing from a public interest
perspective.
This cannot be the focus for the CHIP, whose
interest is in the business.
I am concerned that the connection between the ability for these
CHIPs to be transparent has diminished
significantly.
While CHIPs are subject to the regulatory
standards, they are not accountable to the Local Government Official
Information and Meetings Act. In effect, these boards and the
organizations have become, in essence, much like legal
castles.
I have found with one CHIP they have blocked all contact to the board
from the public, refusing to take public messages.
One of the important points Buchanan makes is that the tool of public
law is not accessible to ensure
transparency and accountability for these NGO
agencies.
When it comes to CHIPs, the public law remedies are
not available when social assets are
transferred from the public sector to the CHIP,
leading to decision-making which is remote from the public and tenants.
In one CHIP, 90% of
existing tenants are not eligible for IRRS.
CHIPs do not provide equitable access to
housing that does not create
unintended hardship.
I have had an ongoing issue with one CHIP concerning a
tenancy that they
manage and their failure to uphold their responsibilities
of landlord under the RTA.
If I thought the failure in the local providers was
enough, I believe that permitting a body to offer these
services at distance would only exacerbate these
problems I have experienced in dealing with them.
And my question is: if it does not work, why
keep doing it?
Thank you, Max, for coming along today.
Can I just ask you in terms of the proposal in front of us,
which is to amend the trust deed, what would you
see
as satisfying your concerns in terms of the deed?
Well
, I
could say that you could make them accountable
to the LGOA
OMA. That would be a start.
But I
have a telecom provider. If I wanted to
talk to
the chief executive, it's
impossible to talk to him about
his business. And I think that
the provision of social housing, it's a
social good.
I don't think that a business model would work.
The people whose client-- who are not people who can
access housing in the private
sector. And someone's made the point before, and people
can't distinguish between social housing and affordable
housing. The people in social housing are going to be people with
limited income who have no other
means of accessing housing
in the private market. And people in
affordable housing, they're children of the middle
class. We're giving money to another group at
expense to, I'd argue,
the most disadvantaged group. And housing has
become another
stratification of inequity in New Zealand.
Well, we are at time, Max. I want to thank you-
Thank you, Max
... for coming and making a submission to the committee this morning.
And that concludes our submissions on this bill.